# Pairs Trading

Pairs trading is a type of mean reversion trading strategy first introduced by technical analyst researchers at Morgan Stanley in the mid-1980s. On a high level, pairs trading involves matching a long position with a short position in two highly cointegrated stocks. A statistical tool often used in timeseries analysis, cointegration measures the degree to which two time series' means trend together. In pairs trading, we apply cointegration on the difference of prices between two stocks, otherwise known as the spread, to detect assets that tend to trend similarly. One of the main advantages of this strategy is market neutrality. Since traders are trading the spread between two assets and not individual assets, a pairs trader can find statistical arbitrage opportunities regardless of market direction. In other words, we should not expect better or worse performance during economic downswings. Furthermore, traders remain delta neutral when using this strategy, making pairs trading relatively low risk, and theoretically less volatile than a market-following strategy. As a result of this risk advantage, many hedge funds have historically leveraged pairs trading, despite it's low relative returns. However, this strategy is widely known in the modern market and would likely not provide high returns in a real market setting. Despite this, pairs trading sets the groundwork for further research into statistical arbitrage and remains an interesting topic for research.

After two cointegrated stocks are identified, if a cointegration discrepancy occurs - when the spread between two securities diverges from their historical rolling mean and beyond some threshold - the trader invests a dollar-matched long position in the underperforming security and short position in the overperforming security. If the spread between these assets does indeed reconverge, which is expected due to the identified relationship between pairs, traders will make a profit.

One of the keys to successful Pairs Trading is being able to efficiently detect pairs. In a notebook published a few months ago, Abhi designed and applied a basic pais trading strategy to the equity and crypto markets. In our notebook, We propose enhancements to last semester's Pairs Trading work done by Abhi. First, we will apply Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and clustering to the pricing timeseries', exploring a variety of clustering methods in the process. Within each cluster, we will then perform cointegration tests to identify pairs. Because of the use of clustering and PCA, we expect to find a reduction in needed computation time, thus allowing us to use a larger universe size when backtesting, which theoretically will allow us to compute more profitable pairs. Furthermore, we will also explore a variety of parameter optimizations for the strategy, specifically with respect to lookback, reset frequency of pair selection, and zscore cutoffs. Lastly, we will also explore the idea of using the hurst exponent as an additional criteria when selecting pairs.
